Readme (#1)
cosmos/vega-test: README.md

# Cosmos-Hub Vega  Upgrade Test Instruction

This document describes the  procedures to test cosmoshub Vega upgrade locally.
This upgrade will bring the new release of Cosmos-SDK v0.44.0 and IBC 1.0-RC6 into gaia.

## Version
- presently running cosmoshub-4, Gaia version: v5.0.5
- going to upgrade to cosmoshub-4, Gaia version: v6.0.0

## Chain upgrade by cosmovisor

### Test Plan
This document uses the data exported from live cosmoshub-4 to mock the upgrade. We will run two nodes locally with an exported genesis file to upgrade both nodes to gaia v6.0.0-Vega by cosmovisor. One of the two nodes will be a validator with over 67% power.

### Build the binary of old version
```shell
cd gaia
git checkout release/v5.0.5
make install
```
```shell
gaiad version
# v5.0.5
```
### Change the genesis file

> We have prepared a genesis file in this repo which was obtained by `gaiad export` on cosmoshub-4 network at height 7368387. Uncompress this genesis file and use it as the genesis data to mock the cosmoshub upgrade.

Reviewer: Is this suppose to be `gaia export`?

```shell
# change chain id
sed -i '' 's%"chain_id": "cosmoshub-4",%"chain_id": "test",%g' genesis.json

# substitue "Certus One", this is our  node1, you can find the key info. in priv_validator_key_val1.json in this repo.
sed -i '' 's%cOQZvh/h9ZioSeUMZB/1Vy1Xo5x2sjrVjlE/qHnYifM=%qwiUMxz3llsy45fPvM0a8+XQeAJLvrX3QAEJmRMEEoU=%g' genesis.json
sed -i '' 's%B00A6323737F321EB0B8D59C6FD497A14B60938A%D5AB5E458FD9F9964EF50A80451B6F3922E6A4AA%g' genesis.json
sed -i '' 's%cosmosvalcons1kq9xxgmn0uepav9c6kwxl4yh599kpyu28e7ee6%cosmosvalcons16k44u3v0m8uevnh4p2qy2xm08y3wdf92xsc3ve%g' genesis.json

# substitue "Binance Staking", this is our node2, also the validator who will own over 67% power. you can find the key info. in priv_validator_key_val1.json in this repo. 
# tendermint pub_key
sed -i '' 's%W459Kbdx+LJQ7dLVASW6sAfdqWqNRSXnvc53r9aOx/o=%oi55Dw+JjLQc4u1WlAS3FsGwh5fd5/N5cP3VOLnZ/H0=%g' genesis.json
# priv_val address
sed -i '' 's%83F47D7747B0F633A6BA0DF49B7DCF61F90AA1B0%7CB07B94FD743E2A8520C2B50DA4B03740643BF5%g' genesis.json
#  Validator consensus address, try command ` gaiad keys parse 83F47D7747B0F633A6BA0DF49B7DCF61F90AA1B0` to see if you can get the same addr.

> sed -i '' 's%cosmosvalcons1s0686a68krmr8f46ph6fklw0v8us4gdsm7nhz3%cosmosvalcons10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4x`vxpcrp%g' genesis.json

Reviewer 2: There's a stray character introduced here cosmosvalcons10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4x`vxpcrp.
An extra `
Just to confirm that address was right otherwise, I also tried `gaiad keys parse 7CB07B94FD743E2A8520C2B50DA4B03740643BF5`, which produced this:
```
formats:
- cosmos10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4apx3rn
- cosmospub10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4z82z6k
- cosmosvaloper10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4c4jy0q
- cosmosvaloperpub10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl42kt8d9
- cosmosvalcons10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4vxpcrp
- cosmosvalconspub10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4mjs085
```
```suggestion
sed -i 's%cosmosvalcons1s0686a68krmr8f46ph6fklw0v8us4gdsm7nhz3%cosmosvalcons10jc8h98awslz4pfqc26smf9sxaqxgwl4xvxpcrp%g' genesis.json
```

#### Setup the environmental variables
```shell
export EXPORTED_GENESIS=genesis.json 
export BINARY=gaiad 
export CHAIN_ID=test 
export CHAIN_DIR=data 

export VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR=$CHAIN_DIR/$CHAIN_ID/val1 
export VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR=$CHAIN_DIR/$CHAIN_ID/val2 
export VAL_1_KEY_NAME="val1" 
export VAL_2_KEY_NAME="val2" 
export VAL_1_MONIKER="val1" 
export VAL_2_MONIKER="val2" 

export USER_CHAIN_DIR=$CHAIN_DIR/$CHAIN_ID/val2
export USER_MNEMONIC="junk appear guide guess bar reject vendor illegal script sting shock afraid detect ginger other theory relief dress develop core pull across hen float"
export USER_KEY_NAME="user"
```
#### Init the chain and setup the user account
```shell
$BINARY config chain-id test --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR 
$BINARY config keyring-backend test --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR 
$BINARY config broadcast-mode block --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR 

$BINARY config chain-id test --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR 
$BINARY config keyring-backend test --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR 
$BINARY config broadcast-mode block --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR 

# Validator 1
$BINARY init test --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR --chain-id=$CHAIN_ID
# Validator 2
$BINARY --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR init test --chain-id=$CHAIN_ID
#user

> echo $USER_2_MNEMONIC | $BINARY --home $USER_2_CHAIN_DIR keys add $USER_2_KEY_NAME --recover --keyring-backend=test

Reviewer 2: `$USER_2_MNEMONIC` is never set in this shell sequence

@yaruwangway can you confirm which one is used here?

Author: Hi, I changed `$USER_2` to `$USER`, please find in the new commit fabf471ec36658f2bee84a540c8efcdc00cee7f9

cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega/bin
```
#### Start by cosmovisor
For val1:
```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=gaiad
export DAEMON_HOME= $(pwd)/$VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
cosmovisor start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR
```
For val2:

open a new terminal:
```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=gaiad
export DAEMON_HOME= $(pwd)/$VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
cosmovisor start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR
```
### Propose upgrade
The user owns by val2 is a delegator. So user can vote. Since we changed the [gov parameters](####Modify some gov parameters for test efficiency), the delegations this user delegated are far enough for this proposal to pass. 
```shell
cosmovisor tx gov submit-proposal software-upgrade Vega \
--title Vega \
--deposit 100uatom \
--upgrade-height 7368587 \
--upgrade-info "upgrade to Vega" \
--description "upgrade to Vega" \
--gas 400000 \
--from user \
--keyring-backend test \
--chain-id test \
--home data/test/val2 \
--node tcp://localhost:36657 \
--yes
```
### Vote
open a new terminal to vote by user.
```shell
cd vega-test

> gaiad query gov proposal 54 \

Reviewer 2: this should be:

`gaiad tx gov vote 54 yes --from user --keyring-backend test --chain-id test --home data/test/val2 --node tcp://127.0.0.1:36657`

- by using cosmovisor v0.1 you might have [node hanging issue](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/9875) when query a result of large output size. For example, `gaiad q gov proposals` will hang the node being queried, this issue will not appear for cosmovisor versions later than v0.1.

#### method I: manually prepare the new binary
##### method I: set cosmosvisor
create the folder for cosmosvisor for val1 and val2, and put the old binary in `cosmovisor/genesis/bin`.
```shell
mkdir -p $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
mkdir -p $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
```

Build the new gaia binary
```shell
cd gaia
git checkout start-upgrade
make install
```
Create the folders for the two nodes and put the upgrade gaia binary into `cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega/bin`:
```shell
mkdir -p $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega/bin
mkdir -p $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega/bin
cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega/bin
cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega/bin
```

> ##### method I: start cosmovisor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Method I: start Cosmovisor
```

For val1:
```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=gaiad
export DAEMON_HOME= $(pwd)/$VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
cosmovisor start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR
```
For val2:

open a new terminal:
```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=gaiad
export DAEMON_HOME= $(pwd)/$VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
cosmovisor start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR
```
##### Method I: propose upgrade

> The user owns by val2 is a delegator. So user can vote. Since we changed the gov parameters, the delegations this user delegated are far enough for this proposal to pass.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The user owned by validator 2 is a delegator, so this user can vote. Since we changed the gov parameters, the voting power this user has delegated is more than enough for this proposal to pass.
```

```shell
cosmovisor tx gov submit-proposal software-upgrade Vega \
--title Vega \
--deposit 100uatom \
--upgrade-height 7368587 \
--upgrade-info "upgrade to Vega" \
--description "upgrade to Vega" \
--gas 400000 \
--from user \
--keyring-backend test \
--chain-id test \
--home data/test/val2 \
--node tcp://localhost:36657 \
--yes
```
##### Method I: Vote

> open a new terminal to vote by user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open a new terminal to vote by user.
```

```shell
cd vega-test
gaiad tx gov vote 54 yes \
--from user \
--keyring-backend test \
--chain-id test \
--home data/test/val2 \
--node tcp://127.0.0.1:36657 
--yes
```

> after voting period finishes, check the vote result by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the voting period finishes, check the vote result by using:
```

```shell
$BINARY query gov proposal 54
```

> the proposal status should be `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The proposal status should be `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`.
```

```shell
content:
  '@type': /cosmos.upgrade.v1beta1.SoftwareUpgradeProposal
  description: upgrade to Vega
  plan:
    height: "7368587"
    info: upgrade to Vega
    name: Vega
    time: ""
    upgraded_client_state: null
  title: Vega
deposit_end_time: ""
final_tally_result:
  abstain: "0"
  "no": "0"
  no_with_veto: "0"
  "yes": "32099700"
proposal_id: "54"
status: PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED
submit_time: ""
total_deposit:
- amount: "100"
  denom: uatom
voting_end_time: ""
voting_start_time: ""
```

> After `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`, wait till the upgrade height is reached and comovisor will apply upgrade.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`, wait until the upgrade height is reached, Cosmovisor will now apply the upgrade.
```

#### Method II: auto-download the new binary

> ##### method II: set cosmosvisor
> 
> Create the folder for cosmosvisor for val1 and val2, and put the old binary in `cosmovisor/genesis/bin`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### method II: setup Cosmosvisor

Create the Cosmovisor folder for for validator 1 and validator 2, and put the old binary in `cosmovisor/genesis/bin`.
```

```shell
mkdir -p $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
mkdir -p $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
cp $(which gaiad) $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
```

> ##### method II: start cosmovisor
> For val1:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Method II: start Cosmovisor
For validator 1:
```

```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=gaiad
export DAEMON_HOME= $(pwd)/$VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
export DAEMON_ALLOW_DOWNLOAD_BINARIES=true
cosmovisor start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $VAL_1_CHAIN_DIR
```

> For val2:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For validator 2:
```

open a new terminal:
```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=gaiad
export DAEMON_HOME= $(pwd)/$VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
export DAEMON_ALLOW_DOWNLOAD_BINARIES=true
cosmovisor start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $VAL_2_CHAIN_DIR
```
##### Method II: propose upgrade

> With auto-download enabled, we can propose upgrade with the `upgrade-info` containing links to the new binaries from the [github releases](https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases). If you want to make sure that the binary downloaded is absolutely correct, it is good to do your own checksum validation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With auto-download enabled, we can propose our upgrade with the `--upgrade-info` flag containing links to the new binaries from the [github releases](https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases). If you want to make sure that the binary downloaded is absolutely correct, we recommend you do your own checksum validation.
```

--deposit 100uatom \
--upgrade-height 7368587 \
--upgrade-info '{"binaries":{"linux/amd64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-linux-amd64?checksum=sha256:78d626bbb12352c3301b02429188a89104606a5c746d7e3f3d6d4b2a01d04711","darwin/arm64":"https://github.com/cosmos/vega-test/raw/readme/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad?checksum=sha256:a3950dcdacac8008bef2ed4e2cca161b70e2eaf509757e167361fd75a5ff09a3","linux/arm64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-linux-arm64?checksum=sha256:d15b13e937220eaee77ddb2e1e866adb5e9982041f5f5567b087f7b79b7bf4cd","darwin/amd64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-darwin-amd64?checksum=sha256:a0da886991dcd3bf2a4e5efff37e09b822fe65998bd5ba8d1a9aed1f83796057","windows/amd64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-windows-amd64?checksum=sha256:54b9d0d0d9ea0c3dcfc074270aa2dca95ce395f09e22275b7fd8f4a51f5d7db3"}}' \
--description "upgrade to Vega" \
--gas 400000 \
--from user \
--keyring-backend test \
--chain-id test \
--home data/test/val2 \
--node tcp://localhost:36657 \
--yes
```
##### Method II: Vote

> open a new terminal to vote by user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open a new terminal to vote by user.
```

```shell
cd vega-test
gaiad tx gov vote 54 yes \
--from user \
--keyring-backend test \
--chain-id test \
--home data/test/val2 \
--node tcp://127.0.0.1:36657 
--yes
```

> after voting period finishes, check the vote result by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the voting period finishes, check the vote result by using:
```

```shell
$BINARY query gov proposal 54
```

> the proposal status should be `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The proposal status should now be `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`.
```

  description: upgrade to Vega
  plan:
    height: "7368587"
    info: '{"binaries":{"linux/amd64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-linux-amd64?checksum=sha256:78d626bbb12352c3301b02429188a89104606a5c746d7e3f3d6d4b2a01d04711","linux/arm64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-linux-arm64?checksum=sha256:d15b13e937220eaee77ddb2e1e866adb5e9982041f5f5567b087f7b79b7bf4cd","darwin/amd64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-darwin-amd64?checksum=sha256:a0da886991dcd3bf2a4e5efff37e09b822fe65998bd5ba8d1a9aed1f83796057","windows/amd64":"https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v6.0.0-rc1/gaiad-v6.0.0-rc1-windows-amd64?checksum=sha256:54b9d0d0d9ea0c3dcfc074270aa2dca95ce395f09e22275b7fd8f4a51f5d7db3"}}'
    name: Vega
    time: ""
    upgraded_client_state: null
  title: Vega
deposit_end_time: ""
final_tally_result:
  abstain: "0"
  "no": "0"
  no_with_veto: "0"
  "yes": "0"
proposal_id: "54"
status: PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED
submit_time: ""
total_deposit:
- amount: "100"
  denom: uatom
voting_end_time: ""
voting_start_time: ""
```

> After `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`, wait till the upgrade height is reached and comovisor will auto-download the new binary fitting your platform and apply upgrade. Please note, the link of binary for GOOS=darwin GOARCH=arm64(for mac M1 users) is from this repo, not from our releases (presently we do not provide binary for this platform in our release).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After `PROPOSAL_STATUS_PASSED`, wait until the upgrade height is reached. Cosmovisor will now auto-download the new binary specific to your platform and apply the upgrade. Please note, the link of the binary for GOOS=darwin GOARCH=arm64(for mac M1 users) is from this repo, not from our releases (we do not currently provide binaries for this platform in our release).
```

## Upgrade result
### Method I:

> When the upgrade height is reached, you can find info. in the log:  `ERR UPGRADE "Vega" NEEDED at height: 7368587: upgrade to Vega` and `applying upgrade "Vega" at height:7368587`. Then the chain will progress to produce blocks after both nodes upgrade.
> ### Method II:
> When the upgrade height is reached, you can find info. in the log: `INF applying upgrade "Vega" at height: 7368587`. Then chain will progress to produce blocks after both nodes upgrade.
> 
> ## Repeating the test
> 
> If you want to try running the test again, or if you made a mistake while running it the first time, make sure to do the following steps:
> 
> 1. `cd vega-test`,`gaiad unsafe-reset-all --home data/test/val1` and `gaiad unsafe-reset-all --home data/test/val2`
> 2. If you ran the upgrade successfully with cosmovisor `auto-download` enabled, make sure that you remove the downloaded binary from `data/test/val1/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega` and `data/test/val2/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega`. Also remove the symbolic link with `rm data/test/val1/cosmovisor/current` and `rm data/test/val2/cosmovisor/current`.
> Now you should be able to start the two binaries again and perform the upgrade from the start.
> 
> ## Further info: test new modules
> Now you can explore the functions of new modules in gaia.
> For authz module, you can refer https://github.com/cosmos/sdk-tutorials/pull/786/files for further testing.
> 
> ## Reference
> 
> [cosmovisor quick start](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/master/cosmovisor)
> 
> [changelog of cosmos-sdk v0.43.0](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/v0.43.0/CHANGELOG.md#v0430---2021-08-10)
> 
> [cosmos/ibc-go v1.0.0](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/tree/v1.0.0)
> 
> [Gravity DEX Upgrade Simulation Test](https://github.com/b-harvest/gravity-dex-upgrade-test/blob/kogisin/v5.0.5-upgrade-simulation/v5.0.5/README.md)
> 
> [cosmovisor](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/master/cosmovisor)
> ## changes in genesis file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the upgrade block height is reached, you can find the following information in the log: `ERR UPGRADE "Vega" NEEDED at height: 7368587: upgrade to Vega` and `applying upgrade "Vega" at height:7368587`. The chain will continue to produce blocks after both nodes have completed the upgrade.
### Method II:
When the upgrade block height is reached, you can find the following information in the log: `INF applying upgrade "Vega" at height: 7368587`. The chain will continue to produce blocks after both nodes have completed the upgrade.

## Repeating the test

If you want to try running the test again, or if you made a mistake while running it the first time, make sure to do the following steps:

1. `cd vega-test`,`gaiad unsafe-reset-all --home data/test/val1` and `gaiad unsafe-reset-all --home data/test/val2`
2. If you ran the upgrade successfully with the Cosmovisor `auto-download` flag enabled, make sure that you remove the downloaded binary from `data/test/val1/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega` and `data/test/val2/cosmovisor/upgrades/Vega`. Also remove the symbolic link with `rm data/test/val1/cosmovisor/current` and `rm data/test/val2/cosmovisor/current`.
Now you should be able to start the two binaries again and perform the upgrade from the start.

## Further info: test new modules
Now you can explore some of the functions of the new modules in Gaia.
For the AuthZ module, please refer to https://docs.cosmos.network/master/modules/authz/

## Reference

[Cosmovisor quick start](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/master/cosmovisor)

[Changelog of cosmos-sdk v0.43.0](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/v0.43.0/CHANGELOG.md#v0430---2021-08-10)

[cosmos/ibc-go v1.0.0](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/tree/v1.0.0)

[Gravity DEX Upgrade Simulation Test](https://github.com/b-harvest/gravity-dex-upgrade-test/blob/kogisin/v5.0.5-upgrade-simulation/v5.0.5/README.md)

[Cosmovisor](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/master/cosmovisor)
## Changes in the genesis file
```

Regarding AuthZ module, maybe it's better to refer to https://docs.cosmos.network/master/modules/authz/ ? What do you think?
